We hear these stories about, you know,
basically
private companies can kind of dictate
the terms of the deals because there's
so much overwhelming investor demand and
you get this vision of people like
literally pounding down the door to get
in on a particular loan. Is that Was
that accurate in the past?
>> No, I I I think um
even even the managers of of private
credit would tell you in honesty, maybe
not on the record, that they're
surprised how quickly this has grown. Um
you know, so if you look at some of
these funds that have, you know, grown
10x over the last 5-10 years,
um I don't think that they have grown
their sourcing abilities by 5 to 10x. Um
so, if you contrast it to say private
equity, the way a private equity fund
works is they find the investment
opportunity and then they go call the
funds from their LPs. Private credit,
most of these funds work where they
taken the money first and then they go
out and find the investments. So,
they're um
under much more pressure to find
investments, which creates this
competitive environment that you
uh alluded to. You know, some of the
issues that we talked to that may have
been in the public markets in the past
tell us that when they go to the private
credit market, it's just a competition
for, you know, who will jump the highest
for the piece of meat. Um and what that
translates to in the
credit world is uh either lower interest
rate, uh weaker covenants, or a
combination of the both.
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, I think it's fair to say that if we
didn't have the situation with Iran, we
would be talking a lot more about
private credit.
>> Yeah, for sure. Jamie Dimon, he talked
about the cockroaches. We keep getting
these headlines um over the last several
weeks, maybe months, various mini, you
know, not not blow-ups per se, but mini
something between a hiccup and a
blow-up. In some cases, you hear about
redemptions being slowed down, etc. Not
great headlines and not great on charts
often, too, when you look at the various
publicly traded instruments that one
would associate with private credit.
>> Right. So, I love that you said
something between a hiccup and a
blow-up, cuz this is the difficulty I
have in talking about the private credit
space at the moment, which is you either
find people who are, you know, often
very close to the private credit
industry or in it, who will argue that
this is just, you know, a tiny bump in
the road. This is maybe a few
cockroaches, like nothing to worry
about, although a single cockroach would
worry me in my own household. But
anyway, um or you get doomsayers who are
like, this is financial crisis 2.0,
right? And it's very difficult to find
nuanced commentary in between.
>> Yeah, and we We're always looking for
nuanced commentary. So, this is no
problem for the Outlaw's podcast.
>> This That's right. Okay, so we're trying
to rise to the occasion with some
nuanced commentary on private credit.
And trust me, I have watched and seen
and read a lot of things on this topic.
And one thing that stood out in
particular to me was a particular um
seminar or lecture that came out from a
firm called Osterwise recently. And we
had a couple of sort of old old school
bond hands talking about the rise of
private private credit and how to think
about it in the context of the history
of the bond market. And this is
something that I think is often missed
is what exactly is private credit's role
when you think about overall corporate
credit.
>> That's a good way to put it, right? Uh
cuz we can look at the the various
funds, etc. But within the broad history
of the evolution of the bond market and
within the current just sort of
landscape of fixed income, like what is
private credit? What you know, the the
way I like to
frame a lot of questions is from the
perspective of the investor,
what problem does the existence of
private credit solve for their portfolio
needs, right? Because that is the
consistent thing. We talk to endowment
managers, we talk to investors, etc.
Every instrument in theory, like it
solves some sort of problem. Maybe you
have a lot of money that is locked up
for a long time. It's like, okay, you're
willing to trade that away for some
extra premium, etc. What problem does
private credit solve
>> Well, I was going to say also from the
perspective of the issuer.
>> And from the issuer,
>> Right. Cuz the issuer, if you're a
company looking for financing, you have
a bunch of different choices. And one of
the ones that has become very popular in
recent years is private credit. And in
fact, you could I mean, there's a
dynamic here where both investors are
demanding it, but issuers are also very,
very happy to lend into that market for
various reasons that we are about to get
into.
>> Let's do it.
>> All right. So, we do in fact have the
perfect guest. We're going to be
speaking with John Sheehan. He is a
portfolio manager for the Strategic
Income Fund at Osterweis. And Craig
Manchuck, he's also a portfolio manager
at the Strategic Income Fund. So, thank
you so much, John and Craig, for coming
on Off the Cuff.
>> Thank you for having us.
>> Thanks for having us.
>> So, maybe just to begin with, how long
have you guys been in the bond space?
>> The firm has had a fixed income strategy
for 20
coming up on 24 years, actually.
Started by our one of our other
partners, Carl Kaufman.
Um,
you originally the firm here was started
as an equity only firm. And as the
firm's clients started to get older,
founder John Osterweis wanted to expand
into the fixed income space.
Brought Carl in and um, the the has been
in operation since uh April of 2002.
>> What kind of fund is it when we're
talking about it? Is it
Tell us about the general the mandate
and the structure of the fund and maybe
who is like the sort of like the modal
client for whom this would be a a
vehicle that they would put their money
in?
>> So, the the fund was set up to be the
only fixed income fund that our private
clients needed. So, we have an extremely
broad mandate. We can go anywhere. And
so, it was a it was a very very early
unconstrained bond fund uh which has
some distinct advantages and some
distinct disadvantages. The advantages
are we get to go where we see the best
opportunities. So, our mantra is
to look for the most attractive parts of
the market and then we look for the
least risky ways to play those most
attractive parts at any given time. And
so, that as the cycle changes, as
business cycles are stronger, we would
gravitate more towards credit. And as it
weakens, we could gravitate more towards
Treasury. So, the fund has over its life
cycle moved back and forth. But by and
large, since the financial crisis, we've
been largely in high yield, IG,
and convertible bonds. Um our client
base has predominantly been RIAs and
wealth management firms and and
individuals. Some of those are existing
private clients of the firm right now.
So, fund is about uh 5.8 billion dollars
and it is structured as a 40 Act
open-end mutual fund.
>> So, once upon a time, if you were
looking uh to invest in credit, say in
2002, um
you would have had a limited set of
options. So, you basically had
investment grade, which are bonds issued
by People always use the word blue chip
companies, which sounds so old-fashioned
to me nowadays, but companies with
relatively strong balance sheets that
are rated by the rating agencies as
investment grade, or
you would have the option of bonds in
the high-yield market, aka junk, so
companies with weaker balance sheets um
and weaker credit ratings.
Tell us about how this sort of um I
guess menu of credit options has
expanded post the 2008 financial crisis.
That's basically a long-winded way of me
saying, where does private credit come
from?
>> Private credit um you know, had been in
existence uh prior to the financial
crisis, but um really saw expansive
growth after the financial crisis. So,
um if you go back into even, you know,
the '80s with the growth of the
high-yield market, um prior to that,
highly leveraged companies um you know,
companies that didn't have
investment-grade balance sheets
uh couldn't really borrow much in the
public markets. Um so, either they, you
know, financed internally or relied much
more heavily on the bank market. Um as,
you know, the high-yield market grew
famously with the help of Milken,
um it allowed more companies, more
highly leveraged companies to access
public markets. Uh that evolved into the
leveraged loan market. Uh the leveraged
loan market uh
once upon a time used to be held on the
bank balance sheets. Uh they began to
syndicate those loans, and what was
really the step function there was
the evolution of the CLO market, where
the banks could take those loans, put
them into a securitized structure,
uh which became CLOs, uh which led to
the growth there.
Um but then, after the financial crisis,
the bank regulators really did not want
banks lending to
uh highly leveraged and/or risky
entities, both corporations and
individuals.
So you saw pretty strict capital
requirements. There is an explicit
prevention from banks lending to
companies with greater than six times
leverage.
So that created this
need for lending outside of the bank
market. You know, those companies didn't
go away. Their borrowing needs didn't
end.
So
that vacuum was created by private
credit. So you saw many of the same
entities that were lending
in the private credit market previously
in the private equity market. So
they also saw a need to finance their
LBOs that was no longer able to be done
at the banks.
So they started a number of different
fund structures. The BDC fund structure
had been around prior to the financial
crisis.
But these dedicated private credit funds
really began to proliferate after the
financial crisis.
>> Can I just add something to that? Just
from an historical perspective, I also
think that
we've been talking about private credit
as it
as it stands today, but it it started so
much earlier and it started in an area
that I think most people will tend to
forget about, which is
GE Capital was one of the largest
providers of private credit under the GE
umbrella for many, many, many years.
They were financing lots of different
things though. They were financing rail
cars. They were financing aircraft
engines. They were financing
the purchase of MRIs and other, you
know, health care equipment. And they
they were extraordinarily successful.
And what it did is it created a large
body of
really experienced lenders
who ultimately splintered off and went
into different areas and the businesses.
And one of the areas one of the
businesses that that started from them
was
a company called Heller Financial which
uh had been around for a while, but they
hired some GE Capital guys to come in
and they really kind of took the
original Heller business, which was
financing yellow equipment and rail cars
and things, into the middle market LBO
space. So, they became critical
providers of
financing for that space at a time when
there really weren't many away from the
banks. So, you know, a lot of this has
been around for a long time. People just
forget about it because there's not as
not as many people out there that are as
old as we are
um that remember those guys from the
'80s and '90s.
>> Yeah, and you you saw that with with a
lot of the consolidation of the
financial institutions. Away from GE,
you know, you had CIT was a big lender
in that space. Uh even in the aircraft
lending space, uh an organization ILFC
was owned by AIG and the regulators, you
know, wanted that highly levered,
riskier financing out of the uh
systematically important financial
institutions.
>> Well, speaking of people not realizing
some of the history here, it took me an
embarrassingly long amount of time to
realize that all the stories that I'd
written about shadow banking in the
aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis
were basically private credit.
>> Yeah, it's interesting to think about
like yeah, you you know, I'm familiar to
some extent. I don't know the full
history of like GE Capital, but I had
certainly heard of it. I knew that it
became a big profit center for GE itself
and it would make sense that a company
like GE or GM even, but uh GE would have
its own lending arm and then like do its
own financing on the side, but I never
really thought of it as like private
credit per se.
>> Right.
>> But it's interesting to hear that yeah,
like this was like an origin that a lot
of the lending form types, etc. that
were sort of emerged out of these
practices in-house.
Then where did it go from there? So, you
mentioned okay, like real asset
investing, maybe it's like aircraft
lending or, you know, aircraft finance,
etc.
When did it sort of When it How did it
um splinter off into all of these
different fields and areas beyond just
the sort of like
the tangible goods financing?
>> One of the places it went was in an area
of mezzanine finance. And again, back in
the early days of the LBO market,
the the sponsors were always looking for
ways, how do we fill in the gaps?
Can't get this deal quite across the
finish line with the equity we want to
put in. Where do we fill in the gaps?
And there were mezzanine funds. And they
were
hybrids somewhere between
credit lenders and private equity
investors. So, they would take the most
junior piece, typically a preferred or
subordinated piece of debt, and get a
little bit of equity in the form of
warrants or something
alongside, so that they were targeting
slightly higher return profile than the
typical debt guys were, but they weren't
going to get the full bang for their
buck of the that the PE guys were
getting. And that lasted for a number of
years, but but as the market matured,
we it and the the sponsors found that
they no longer really needed the um
the mez guys to the same degree. They're
still around, but ultimately, you know,
mez funds were niche-y kind of product
that I think over time has just kind of
been squeezed out between the size and
scale of the combination of leveraged
loans and high-yield bonds and um you
know, the the PE firms' desires to keep
as much of the equity economics
themselves as they possibly could.
>> Mhm.
So, today we're at a point where the
private credit market, there are all
these different estimates for exactly
how big it is, and it is, you know,
you're going to get some variation
because it is private, like the clue is
in the name, but by most estimates, it's
bigger than the junk-rated market, which
is kind of crazy if you think about like
how large the junk-rated market has
loomed in the market's collective
consciousness for so long. How did we
get to that particular point? How did we
get to a point where this like
relatively new market, although I take
the point that it has intellectual roots
um before even the financial crisis, but
why did it grow so quickly after 2008?
>> I think there's two macro influences
that had a had a large play in that. Um
first, if you if you look back after the
dot-com meltdown in the equity market,
um we had three straight years of
negative returns in the S&P. That was
the first time that happened since the
Great Depression. The cumulative returns
of high yield for that 20-year period,
1999 to 2019, beat equities.
Um so, among investors, there was a
desire for something away from the
equity market. Um their experience
equities was unsatisfactory, so they
were looking for other alternatives. And
then, in the later part of that time
period, we went through uh the zero
interest rate environment, where, you
know, the Fed, Treasury, etc. drove
interest rates to zero in response to
COVID. Um so, there was a massive desire
for yield
um and better performing assets than
they had in the early part of the 2000s
in the equity market.
Um so, that really led to the
proliferation of the amount of dollars
flowing into the product.
Um and then, on the supply side, we we
touched on it earlier, you know, these
highly leveraged borrowers were
basically shut out of the banking
lending market. Uh so, they needed to
find alternatives uh to to fund their
businesses and and to refinance their
debt. Um so, that those two kind of came
together at the same time and uh really
fueled the growth of the product.
>> Yeah, I think institutionally you had
in in the LBO world sponsors were
looking to have a real partner that they
could go to
repeatedly for all different types of
transactions, go back to them you know
again and again and develop a real
relationship and where they are their
lender could be very expedient as well.
And I think expediency mattered and
provide them with sort of that you know
guaranteed financing which the banks
were providing up until they were
squeezed out from a regulatory
standpoint on the most highly leveraged
transactions. So I think that's what it
really kind of comes down to is is the
ability to provide more leverage than
the banks were allowed to
without running a foul of the
regulators.
>> So one thing that
comes up regularly on the podcast is the
sort of natural synergy between private
credit and insurance. And you know,
insurance companies they have all these
assets and they have this advantage that
they know exactly when those assets will
be withdrawn and it'll probably be in
like 40 years from now. They do not have
to worry at all about
you know a quick run whatever and so
they can harvest
they can harvest that illiquidity
illiquidity premium. They could be they
could put their money into assets that
do not trade very much and that's very
that's very intuitive to me.
Talk to us though you're operating an
unconstrained fund that is a publicly
traded 40 act mutual fund. Talk to us
about what it means you know you say you
look for opportunity. Why are there
private credit assets that aren't all
locked up in these long-term vehicles?
Why does it sometimes make sense for
private credit assets to be in a vehicle
that is just sort of more opportunistic
and you know and has a has a daily quote
potentially.
>> We currently actually right now don't
have any private credit. We were
involved in We were involved in it in
the past, but
>> Okay.
>> I think most of those opportunities have
gone to the dedicated private credit
funds because the there's a one of the
structural differences of the way
they're set up versus the way we're set
up
>> Yeah.
>> is we we are we're we're sort we source
our ideas mostly from investment banks.
Now, some of those investment banks used
to come to us with transactions that
weren't going to fly in the public
market, so they would look and say, you
know, this is a small deal. Uh we're not
going to be able to find buyers from
this among our investors who are
primarily benchmark high yield investors
because it would be outside the index
and it would be illiquid.
And you know, there's been a lot of talk
about and problems with investing in
illiquid securities. One of the real
benefits of our strategy is we always
have lots of liquidity. We have a
historic we have managed our portfolio
in a short duration
with a short duration focus that creates
cash and we keep a lot of front-end
ballast, so as our portfolio is always
creating cash, we could invest in some
pockets of less liquid
strategies, but we we haven't done that.
The private credit guys are set up
differently. They they need a team of
bankers to go out and source all their
deals. They have to knock on companies'
doors or
it's a very different way in the in in
their function of having to source their
transactions to try to fill up the asset
side of their portfolios. And
so because of that, you know, over time,
I think there's a huge structural
difference between the way they approach
it and the way we approach it. But going
just going back briefly to the insurance
company side, you know, insurance
companies have long been investors in
private assets and they used to have
large teams of private debt investors.
And and ultimately over time, what
they've done is they've shrunken those
teams and just said, "Here, you guys
source the transactions for us, and then
we'll uh
we'll give you guys the money, and uh
you know, you can go do it yourselves
sort of on an outsourced basis." So,
naturally, it is a very good fit for
them because they do have long-duration
assets, and there's generally not a uh a
rush for those assets.
>> Could you um say a little bit more about
how competitive it's been in the past to
source private credit deals if you're on
the investor side? We hear these stories
about, you know, basically, uh private
companies can kind of dictate the terms
of the deals because there's so much
overwhelming investor demand, and you
get this vision of people like literally
pounding down the door to get in on a
particular loan. Is that Was that
accurate in the past?
>> No, I I I think um
even even the managers of of private
credit would tell you in honesty, maybe
not on the record, that they're
surprised how quickly this has grown. Um
you know, so if you look at some of
these funds that have, you know, grown
10x over the last 5 10 years,
um I don't think that they have grown
their sourcing abilities by 5 to 10x.
Um so, if you contrast it to, say,
private equity, the way a private equity
fund works is they find the investment
opportunity, and then they go call the
funds from their LPs. Private credit,
most of these funds work where they've
taken the money first, and then they go
out and find the investments. So,
they're um
under much more pressure to find
investments, which creates this
competitive environment that you
uh alluded to. You know, some of the
issues that we talked to, that may have
been in the public markets in the past,
tell us that when they go to the private
credit market, it's just a competition
for, you know, who will jump the highest
for the piece of meat. Um and what that
translates to in the
credit world is either lower interest
rate, uh, weaker covenants, or a
combination of the both. Um, and that
that's really what you've seen with,
uh, private credit in this
hypercompetitive environment that we're
in now.
>> Yeah, one one other thing that John
mentioned, which is actually really
important here.
So, the structural side, this is the
this is what all the liability side of
the, uh, of the balance sheet for
private credit guys, it is is kind of
critically important here. So, if you're
out there and you're raising an
institutional fund, those institutional
funds are generally draw out funds. So,
they're allowed to go out, market, and
say, "Okay, we've raised commitments for
5 or 10 billion dollars. We're going to
go out now and source our investments,
which is the asset side." The LP
commitments are the liability side. So,
they will take on those liabilities as
they find the assets, and they end up
being matched. And this is in a
structure that's typically got a a term,
and it's locked up money that, you know,
they will not will not be providing
liquidity for those institutional
investors. The problem, and this is
where we've run into the big problems,
and this is what is really circulating
in and around the media, is
more recently, when we've gone and taken
this out into these private BDC
structures to market them to the retail
or private wealth world, in order to
raise the money, they've needed to offer
some concessions on the liquidity,
right? Because it makes it easier to
raise money if you're going to allow
people, or you're going to tell them
that you're going to allow them
to redeem at least somewhat
periodically.
That has allowed them to raise money
really fast. It's, you know, it's a
little bit piggy because they've just
said, "Okay, we can raise a lot of
money. Let's just raise the money when
we can." The difference is when those
dollars come in, they come into the
fund, you know, on a subscription basis
and need to be invested quickly and it's
it's that that's what's really created a
lot of the problems and what's really
led to the degradation of credit
underwriting because if you don't invest
those dollars quickly, it creates the
lag on performance in the fund. Minute
that dollar comes in, it's part of your
NAV and therefore it needs to be
invested rapidly in an income earning,
you know, investment. So, that's what's
happened and you you what you had in you
really saw a huge proliferation of this.
I mean, what one of the most obvious and
visible of these you could see on there
would be the the Cliffwater Corporate
Lending Fund, which is CCLFX on your
Bloomberg. If you look that up, you can
look at the asset growth in that and it
really has taken off in the last 5
years. Um
in 2022,
you know, we would speak to our our
wealth management advisors who are
investors in our fund
and ask them about what's working for
them because in 2022, rates are going
up. Investment grade bond funds are are
trading off sharply because people
didn't understand the duration risk that
they were carrying.
High yield funds were weaker, but
nowhere near as bad as IG. And I'd say,
"What's working?" They said, "Oh gosh,
private credit's been working great." I
would say, "Well, that's wonderful, but
that's because they're not taking their
marks." Uh and so they became very very
comfortable because they didn't have to
turn around, talk to their existing
investors and say, "Here, you know, you
lost a lot of money in this fund. It
looks like you've just earned your yield
and your net your NAV's been very very
stable." So, as a result, their clients
were happy, they were happy, and what
happened? Money poured in. So, as that
money poured in, it led to
I think more
bad actors is too strong word, but
really more bad underwriting.
Weaker underwriting, more aggressive
underwriting because they needed to get
that money put to work. So, they would
provide more leverage at at weaker
terms.
>> Can you clarify again, why is it that
with the traditional private asset
model, that they only call on the
capital once it's needed? Because they
what you explained is, okay, once you
take in the capital, if it's not being
invested, it's a drag on NAV, very
intuitive.
Just explain, why is that why is the
other other parts of the private capital
world able to do the thing where you
only call up the LPs when you have a
deal, whereas that's not the case with
private credit where you take in the
money up front?
>> It's what what people are used to and
they've gotten used to in that model
over the years as an institution. Hey,
I'll I'll commit to your fund, you know,
you know, tell me when you need the
money and we'll send it in. And I think
that's the way they do it now.
Exactly how they do it.
Yeah, I don't know if that's a
dollar-for-dollar thing or if they they
they'll do it, you know, with, you know,
in in just installments over time, but
it it does help to provide um
it gives them
the ability to have less drag by having,
you know, you go out and raise a $5
billion fund day one, that money's going
to sit there if you if you got to go out
and
>> sense. I'm just what I'm trying to
establish is why couldn't private credit
work the same way where it's like, okay,
I go out and raise $5 billion worth of
commitment, and then as I get a lending
opportunity, and when then I call up my
LPs and say, okay, you needed to pony up
that $50 million to us that you've
committed and whatever. Why didn't
couldn't it work that way?
>> It could. I I think it's the nature of
the investment. So,
the traditional structure that Craig
described is private equity, right? So,
if you think about an equity investment,
you go out, you buy a company, you take
over management, you, you know, retool
operations, you merge, you do whatever
you do in private equity to increase
value, and then in 3 5 years you want to
turn around and realize that investment.
Where a lending business is more of a
kind of balance sheet perpetual business
where
um you know, you're you're finding new
loans all the time and you have loans
maturing, re-deploying the money. So,
the evergreen structure of an integral
fund makes more sense.
>> makes sense.
>> So, you typically have
>> Yeah.
>> bigger bite sizes in private equity. You
know, it's more heavily concentrated
portfolio with a finite time frame.
Whereas credit, you know, it's it's like
a if you think of bank balance sheet,
like this was funding that used to be
funded by deposits in perpetuity on a
bank balance sheet with no finite time.
>> Yeah, I think that I think that that's
the the fact that that, you know, you
you have a a much smaller number of
investments, many many smaller. I mean,
a typical private equity fund can have 5
to 25 investments depending on its size.
Whereas, the typical private credit fund
is going to have hundreds if not
thousands of So, imagine having to make,
you know, to call, you know, uh $50,
yeah,
you know,
four times a four times a week from your
investor, you know, each of your you
know, hundreds or thousands of them. It
would be really cumbersome.
>> And I I think that also goes to the
logic around the gates. You know, that's
that's been a pretty controversial
topic, but think about a 5-year loan,
right? You probably have 20% of your
loans coming due every year. That's 5% a
quarter. So, the the gates were put in
there to address the fact that, you
know, we have
maturities every quarter that could be
there to meet redemptions. That's that's
where some of the 5% logic came from.
>> Yeah.
>> Um actually, we should talk about the
gates because one of the sort of
defenses that you sometimes hear about
private credit is this idea that, well,
you know,
even if you get a spike in defaults and
all these companies start failing, it's
not necessarily a huge problem for
private credit because we've set up
these limitations on redemptions. So,
you can't get this rapid run for the
exit because the amount of money that
can be taken out of each fund is capped
at, you know, 5% or something like that.
My inclination when I hear stuff like
that is to think like, okay, well, you
you've capped the amount of money that
can exit the fund, but that doesn't mean
that you've stopped people from wanting
to exit the fund. It's just a slower run
than it would be otherwise. So, you're
sort of building up that pressure, but
then again, the response to that is,
well, you know, you're giving investors
time to see their marks build back up or
whatever. But like,
does that selling pressure go away at
all? How helpful are the gates when it
comes to managing stress in private
credit?
>> I think they're critical actually in the
in the uh
retail channel because
you're protecting both
sets of investors. If if, you know,
look at the it's not the asset side of
the equation. It's not the loans that
they're making that are the problem.
It's the It's the other side. So, if if
you're go back and just think about the
what happened at First Republic Bank.
They had They were owning treasuries and
they had $40 billion of redemption
requests for their demand deposits go
out the door in a few days and
the business was sunk. So, if you didn't
have the gates up and you had a run on,
you know, the uh the private credit
funds because people were unhappy, they
got nervous, they got scared, you'd
you'd sink funds very very easily that
way. Um but, you know, it's
it's what's important about it and and
this is where we're going to get into a
potentially thorny period as we move
down the road is
the these funds will either need to do
one of two things. They'll either need
to sell assets to to meet their
redemptions or they'll have to finance
uh the redemption requests provided that
the inflows that they've been seeing
slow down. Now,
I think because of all the noise out
there that we see in the media, um
people's confidence in private credit
space is certainly the retail investors
confidence and the wealth managers
confidence has been shaken. So, it
wouldn't surprise me at all if we see
those flows slow down. If that happens,
then the net outflows will be you know,
potentially greater and they'll build.
That means they these private credit
managers will have to finance those or
they'll have to sell assets. And the
assets they sell are the ones that are
probably the easiest to sell, which
generally are the highest quality.
>> Yeah.
>> So, the concern here and really where
when people are worried about the
contagion, the concern is you are left
with
a
a fund that has raised more debt to meet
some redemptions, then been forced to
redeem to sell more positions and some
of those are your better positions. So,
now you've got a more levered fund with
poorer overall investment quality. Where
does that stop and at what point, you
know, does that potentially blow up?
Because candidly, you know, the private
credit guys may sell, you know, that the
early
sales there were from we heard from Blue
Owl into an insurance company. Okay,
that's great. But but I I'll argue that
we're just seeing the beginnings of the
pools of assets being created that are
are going to take on some of the
stressed or distressed loans in that
space. And those those loans are not
going to be as easy to move, but you'll
find somebody like an Oaktree who
typically does this at points of of
stress or distress.
They'll go to their LPs and say, "Hey,
we have a great opportunity. We want to
raise $10 billion." And because over the
years they've been really really savvy
about that, they're able to raise that
money. So, they'll create a special
opportunities fund to go out and buy
these particular private credit loans
that are stressed or distressed. But you
need the expertise to go in and work out
those loans and potentially either, you
know, take and run the company from an
equity standpoint or
you know, kick the can down the road and
hopefully restructure and revise those
loans. So, I think that's that's where
it really starts to get thorny. If we
get into a protracted redemption cycle,
the financing
runs out and they have to start selling
things. It starts to really cut into the
bone.
>> So, we we we do have a precedent for
how the gates of interval funds have
behaved over time. So, if you go back to
the commercial real estate market, you
know, after Silicon Valley Bank and
First Republic Bank, everyone was trying
to pull their money out of large real
estate interval funds. There's one
famously that hit the gates and
prevented redemptions. Uh that fund now
is has kind of gotten to the other side.
Um it actually had a better return than
its credit fund last year. And you know,
people tend not to panic for longer than
3-6 months, right? You know, human
nature, you know, crisis is a day, a
week, a month. Uh but is if it just
stays there long enough, um people tend
to
get cooler heads and and it works itself
out. Um but as Craig said, that'll help
on the liability management side of
these fund structures. It's not going to
help on the asset side. So, if the
default rates start hitting some of
these levels that people fear and/or
predict,
it's it's it's not going to save you on
the asset side of the equation. Um and
then
maybe to open up another topic, you
know, there's there's two parts of a
default, right? There's when the company
actually declares default and then what
the creditors recover in bankruptcy. I
think there's big fears around some of
these uh recovery values that will be
seen.
Uh some of these are, you know, very
highly levered companies with very few
hard assets.
Um so, that that's going to be uh the
next test when we start getting into
work out of some of these loans, uh what
do the creditors really have to protect
them in bankruptcy?
>> I'm glad you said this because this is a
perfect seg into the question I was
going to go to next, which is, okay, we
trace the history of private credit to
physical things, the type of things that
a GE would sell, maybe like a wind
turbine or or you know, get natural gas
turbine, whatever it is, etc. And we
were talking about the big megatrends of
the 2010s and one of them was the
regulatory push of loans off banks.
Another one was ZIRP. But another one
was the emergence of these predictable
payment streams called software as a
service subscriptions. And this is the
um you know, this is the area in which
you could really have zeros.
A
a natural gas turbine is going to be
worth something at the end. An obsolete
software company is not going to be
worth anything if the business has been
destroyed thanks to AI. But when what
was the moment in which the credit guys
suddenly realized that it that
essentially here's this business that we
used to never think of high tech. It
used to be when when I was a kid, tech
and debt didn't go together. What was
the moment that the credit guys sort of
realized that these are financeable
assets, so to speak, that could come
into the debt world?
>> Joe, you're you hit the nail on the head
here but because this is this is the
spot where really the high yield market
and the private credit market started to
diverge the most. You know, there have
been
uh issuers
in the tech space and in the software
space into high yield but it's
definitely been a more recent
phenomenon. If you go back 10 years,
there were not a lot of software issuers
in the high yield space largely because
of that cuz people couldn't get their
arms around you know, the typical okay,
I need to have two times asset coverage
or two and a half times asset coverage.
We just never saw that. So, those
companies financed themselves either in
the equity market or they financed
themselves in the convertible bond
market. So, we used to see a lot of that
in the convertible bond market because
these are growth companies and and so
the convert market would say, "Okay,
I'll accept a low coupon because I'm
going to have equity participation on
the upside and so my upside isn't capped
at whatever my coupon is."
Uh and I think that that's actually
really been the area where it's it's
diverged the most. How exactly did we
get here? I think it was um
uh you know, a a willingness of these
sponsors to come in and say, "All right,
I'm going to pay 16 or 17 times
enterprise value to EBITDA for this
business and you know, I'm going to put
in an unusually large uh check. Let's
say 40% of that I will put in an equity
instead of the typical 20%. So,
uh historically, you know, people have
uh in the the LBO space, they were
coming to the high yield market saying,
"We'll put 20% down, finance the other
80%." But they go to the private credit
guys and say, "Well, we'll put 40% down
if you'll lend to us on the balance. We
we love this business at 16 times." And
I think they, you know, potentially
persuaded a lot of these uh lenders to
get a little bit too far out over their
skis in terms of the amount of leverage
that they were willing to extend and as
a private credit lender if it's just you
or if it's just you and one other, you
can be a lot more creative in terms of
structure and I think they they also
took on this willingness to say, "Okay,
well, you can't afford to pay me this
interest so how about if we pick it
because if we pick it, my
my investment will grow and it'll give
me sort of a quasi equity like feel
because it's getting bigger." Um so,
that's kind of intriguing to me too. So,
you know, I think that's I think there
is a little bit of
uh lender overzealousness. I think there
was a competitive pressure, but I think
that they they fell prey to um some of
the sponsors
willingness to overpay for some of these
businesses.
>> So, when I hear secured credit that
might not have that much security behind
it as we just discussed with the example
of the software companies. And then,
when I hear, you know, increasing
amounts of leverage on the issuer side,
but also on the fund side because you
have private credit funds that use
leverage to increase their returns. And
then, when I hear illiquidity mismatches
between, you know, a publicly traded BDC
and the underlying assets,
all of those sound very familiar from
financial crisis history um and have
certain, you know, negative connotations
around them. How worried should we be
about the future of private credit at
this point and the idea that is it going
to be a systemic issue for the financial
system?
>> I think the um
the liability structure that we've
discussed numerous times is dramatically
different than what we saw in the
financial crisis. So,
um
you know, most financial institutions
that fell fell because of their
liability structure.
Um you know, they're built to realize
losses over extended periods of time,
which I think many of these uh credit
funds will be able to do.
But I do think that we are going to
enter into a period where we're going to
see significant dispersion among credit
fund managers or private credit
managers.
You know, we've been
lulled into uniformity of returns,
right? If you look in the public
markets, there's been a huge trend
towards indexation. So, you know, most
people own SPY or QQQ or whatever form
you want to pick.
So, equity returns all look very
similar. And that's what happened in in
the early days of private credit where
everything was marked at par, you had an
8, 9, 10% coupon, it looked great.
So, you couldn't really see some of the
cracks below the surface. You know, as
Craig alluded to earlier, there've been
managers who've been doing this for 25,
30 years and there are very new recent
entrants into it. You've seen
substantial growth in their assets that
they had to invest. So, I think that's
probably the first leg that we'll see is
that
you're going to start to see
real dispersion of returns from manager
to manager.
But
you know, they have a good head start
where they have coupons and they have
you know
returns built in that they they can
absorb higher default rates than they
are now.
It's just a question of how high do
those default rates get relative to the
coupons that they're earning.
>> Yeah, we've heard some numbers from from
some of the sell-side
Wall Street analysts that
that suggest that we could see 15%
defaults in private credit.
Seems a little high, but it doesn't It's
not so far out of the realm of
possibility because we've just seen the
practice of
extending more leverage to companies
that probably shouldn't have that much
leverage on. You know, many, many years
ago a good friend of mine who would who
was doing this for a long, long time
told me, "Company gets to six times
levered, you know,
it's very, very difficult to get out
from under that." Uh this is back in the
uh you know, in the early 2000s we were
in a normal rate environment. Now that
that went by the wayside when we went
through this period of extraordinarily
low rates for many, many years post
financial crisis. But now that we're
back where we are today,
um it you know, we're back into that
environment where six, seven times
leverage all of a sudden at the current
borrowing rates becomes a real strain on
most companies' balance sheets. So,
again, if you think about the the legacy
businesses, some of these software
companies that that that were
uh these in these portfolios, they might
be
2020 or 2021 vintage LBOs that haven't
monetized yet. They were borrowing uh
versus a a historically low treasury
rate. Once we raised rates in 2022, all
of a sudden the resets on on these
loans, because they are floating rate,
have gone up. So, it's chewing into the
equity value of these businesses and
it's putting an increasing amount of
strain on the companies to have to cover
their interest expenses. So, I think you
know, that all these things filter into
more and more pressure on these
companies, which could lead us to a spot
where we do get to 15% defaults. I'm not
saying that the probability is is you
know, is very, very high, but um if it
happened, I wouldn't be shocked.
>> And can I just ask you said earlier that
you don't have any private credit
exposure in your fund at the moment, is
that right or
>> That's correct.
>> Okay.
What made you, you know, take that
decision? Because you said you'd been
involved a little bit earlier. And then
secondly, what would you need to see in
the the
to potentially get back in?
>> I think the the reason that we don't is
because we were financed out over time
and in the it was it was never a core
part of what we did. It was a more
ancillary part of our
of our business. There were a few
individual opportunities that came along
with companies that
needed money for a particular reason or
it was a business that people
I don't think widely understood or was
the size of the borrowing requirement.
One of the companies
had
took the money that we lent them and
kept the money on their balance sheet
the whole time. They just had it as a
safety net. It was less than one and a
half times levered for the entire time.
They no longer needed it. They paid us
off and you know, moved on and went to
the next thing. So, other times we were
financed out by
the leverage loan market or the private
credit market where they were going to
be much more aggressive on the terms
that that than the ones that we were
willing to provide. And that's
typically, you know, we we
we're we're we're a bunch of old guys
and we have
we have our ways of doing things that
have been developed over 30 or 40 years.
We're not likely to change our credit
our approach to providing credit just
because the market now all of a sudden
wants to get more aggressive and
look past some of the obvious things
particularly as it comes to structure
and covenant protections
and amounts of leverage. We look at the
business and say, okay, this business is
worth seven times. I'm not going to give
them six and a half times leverage to
something like that. Just doesn't make
sense. So,
>> And if if you go back to
the point you made to begin the podcast,
how private credit and the proliferation
of the loan market has impacted the high
yield investment grade market, you know,
what was once a two-tiered market of
investment grade and non-investment
grade has really become a four-tiered
market. Investment grade, high yield,
leveraged loans, private credit in that
order of credit quality. You know, most
of the credits that do not meet our
underwriting standards have fallen into
leveraged loan and private credit. So,
the high yield market is substantially
higher quality now than it was before.
And the double B portion of the market
is
approaching 60% that used to be about
35%. And the riskiest segment, the
triple Cs, is now about 9%. That used to
be over 20%. So, just by our
underwriting process, we kick out a lot
of the highly leveraged companies, kick
out a lot of the companies that do not
have the interest coverage that we're
looking for.
Um and so,
it was a function of our underwriting
process, but also where the more risky
companies are financing themselves these
days.
>> All right. Well, I think we could talk
about this even more, but um we're going
to have to leave it there. Um John and
Craig, thank you so much for coming on
Odd Lots. Really appreciate it.
>> Thanks so much. Nice being with you.
>> Thank you.
>> So, Joe, I found that conversation super
helpful just to sort of again
contextualize private credit in the
history of the bond market. I do think
setting aside whether or not this is
like a systemic issue. And I do I I do
think like we're probably not even close
to 2008 style crisis, right? Like it
just can't be.
But there are probably some hidden
issues within there that are like going
to start to appear. But setting all of
that aside, I think one of the
challenges of private credit having
these continued crises or at least being
in the headlines all the time is
it is going to have a macroeconomic
impact. If you think of it as this
market that is now bigger than the junk
bond market. Like the junk bond market
is an important source of financing for
companies all around America, and so is
private credit. And so, if you start to
see that particular asset class slow
down, like at a minimum, that's
basically a credit crunch for a bunch of
companies.
>> Totally. And you can see like how
there's like this path dependency. And
again, it doesn't mean it has to be like
systemic, but you can see how there's
this path dependency where, as you
mentioned, you get the headlines about
withdrawals, there are more withdrawals,
these sponsors have to sell good assets,
they might have to take on credit up
borrowing of their own in order to meet
those redemptions and so forth. So, you
can see how that really spirals. I just
really like their um situation situ- how
well they situated the whole
conversation.
>> Their situationship. The way they could
situate in the history of credit. And
they're like, "Look, like if we're
talking about GE credit financing um you
know, jet engine deals, etc., that's
private credit. Like we it's expanded
beyond that, but it's basically all sort
of, you know, versions, you know,
various flavors of a kind of financing
that is quite old and non-exotic at all.
>> Absolutely. But I do think the
sequencing also matters when it comes to
raising money because, you know, as they
pointed out, this idea that like you're
going to start a fund and you
immediately have to start like going out
and sourcing stuff to buy with that
money and it puts pressure on you to get
it like what you can get.
>> That was very interesting. The the um
the difference between fund structure of
a private equity fund versus a private
credit fund, which I had never really
thought of, right? So, VC and PE, you're
like hunting around for deals and so
forth and you're like, "All right, we
got a deal." Then you call up all the
LPs who give you commitments and say,
"Where are those that cash that you
promised to?" Now, whereas in the
financing in the financing realm, um you
know, you just always have the cash on
hand, it's always coming in and out. And
the coming in and out part also
clarified something for me, which is
that unlike with say uh a VC investment
or PE investment where you put the money
in and it's sort of indeterminate when
you get the money back, right? You don't
know when the company's going to IPO,
you don't know when it's going to sell,
etc. With lending, you do have that
schedule from day one of when the money
is supposed to come back in and
therefore the idea of gates and
redemption schedules in the first place
makes more sense because when you have
this sort of pre-understood timing of
when the money comes back in, you can
understand why you have a mechanism in
place to schedule and regulate when the
money is allowed to go back out to the
LPs.
>> Right, but you still need to get back to
some form of normalcy and some point.
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> But like it's obviously incredibly
helpful.
>> Well, and this gets to a thing you know
I wondered about which is like well,
okay, is part of the issue here with
some of these more retail-oriented
private credit which is
education or lack of sophistication
where you have entities putting money
into private credit that hadn't really
appreciated that this is an element of
it which maybe, but on the other hand
>> itself you mean?
>> gating itself. But on the other hand,
like
if you didn't go, you know, the industry
wouldn't be as big as it is today were
you not going out to these less
sophisticated investors. So, um
>> Yeah.
>> two sides of the same coin there.
>> All right. Uh shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the All
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at The Stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Arman, Dash
Bennett at Dash Bot, Kel Brooks at Kel
Brooks, and Kevin Lozano at Kevin Lloyd
Lozano.
>> And for more All Thoughts content, you
should check out our daily newsletter.
You can find that at
bloomberg.com/allthoughts.
>> And you can chat about all of these
topics 24/7 in our Discord
discord.gg/allthoughts.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation,
then please like the video or leave a
comment or better yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.
>> Set me free.
Set me free.